Systems thinking in high-level executive career transitions: 4 different ways of changing connections

Systems are more concerned with connections than elements.
 In our daily lives, we tend to focus on specific positions, leaders, and so on, which are all elements. Systems are more concerned with the ways we connect with other elements.

When you change companies, you're essentially moving to a different subsystem. If your way of connecting and the system's rules remain the same, the only thing that changes is the specific elements (specific leaders, specific responsibilities). Soon enough, the same story will repeat itself.

Systems thinking in the workplace is a broad topic, and this article discusses one aspect of it: changing the way you connect.

Four ways to change system connections
[Image: Diagram]

For a high-level executive in one subsystem (a particular company) who is in a strong connection state, such as the origin point in the top right corner of the diagram, there are four approaches to changing connections:

Move to Point A: Move from one subsystem to another with the same rules, continuing to have strong connections in the same way.

This is the most common approach in the professional world. It's because you have experience with these system rules and connection methods. You become a suitable candidate naturally. However, what benefits you can get can also limit you. You are here to transform, but you end up in a similar system, facing similar issues. Jumping from one similar system to another is often why people say, "All crows are black." That's because you keep hopping between the same system rules, experiencing the same things.

Move to Point B: Within the same system, switch from a strong connection to a weak connection.

This executive might still be suitable for the system but finds the damage caused by the original strong connection is too great. In this case, moving to the more peripheral Point B, such as internal entrepreneurship (from the fat to the temporarily lean), or the fringe business, could be an option. You'll notice that many of the previous troubles might disappear, and there are potential advantages to this system.

If Point B in the original system represents a weak connection, but it's a strong connection in the emerging market, then this change may have a more significant impact. Mature business is often the target, with many people competing for a piece of the pie, and the client and industry landscape is very similar. When you shift your connection to an emerging market, it can help you break out of the old mindset. A change in perspective and understanding is the preparation for transformation. At the edge of the system, your original strong connections become weak, providing you with space.

Move to Point C: Turn weak connections in different systems into strong connections.

Point C represents a different value network with different aesthetics and value prospects. This mode can produce unexpected results during a transformation. Even if your original value network has many more talented individuals, most people can't communicate effectively in the new value network. Aesthetics, skills, and interests are misaligned, making communication difficult. By moving to a different value network, you add weak connections, which means you can communicate and work together. Successful job changes and successful transformations share the same attribute. The difference is that a successful job change is turning a weak connection within the same value network into a strong connection (e.g., with your clients), while a successful transformation is turning a weak connection between different value networks into a strong connection.

Move to Point D: From a strong connection within a system to a disconnected point outside the system.

People have their temperaments and a bit of a gambler's mentality. Sometimes you genuinely cut off all the strong connections you have and jump to a Point C, where you must start new connections from scratch. Passive resignation doesn't need much explanation, but actively severing all connections is quite common.

After reaching Point D, rest for a while and start building new connections, learning various new things, and meeting different people. At times, it can be quite exciting. However, when it comes to implementation, moving from new connections to genuinely strong connections takes quite a few detours.

Many people have taken this path during their transformation. Of course, there are numerous successful examples. However, the survivorship bias cannot be overlooked. I have been young and reckless like this before, and in recent years, I've witnessed many cases. This approach can be compared to shock therapy, with a high level of risk.

Explanation of Weak Connections
Numerous studies have already proven that weak connections play the most significant role during a transformation. However, many positions naturally exclude weak connections. Over time, these positions occupy your entire life. Through peers, colleagues, and customers, they lock in your cognitive boundaries, leaving you no room to create weak connections. These positions often come with high rewards, and they are the envy of many. However, they are also fragile because your life consists entirely of strong connections.

Many business professionals consider whether attending business school helps them create weak connections. It does, but it's essential to note that traditional business schools often establish weak connections within the same system rules. Business schools indeed have a selection mechanism, but pricing is the key to distinguishing clients. People who can pay roughly the same tuition fees, even if they are from different industries, will have similar system rules. So, it's easier to provide resources and understand each other. However, seeing entirely different system rules is not easy.

Writing or producing content is more likely to break the existing system, but you can only establish weak connections between different systems once you have cultivated a "regular reader" or audience. If your audience doesn't frequently read your content, they don't count as weak connections.

In conclusion, systems focus more on connections than elements. Therefore, when considering a transformation, don't rush to analyze specific opportunities. Instead, compare different ways of connecting as shown in the diagram. You may discover entirely different strategies. 
For more discussions on transformation topics, you can click on the "Consult with Me" option in the Energy Thinking in wechat”
 #CareerTransition #SystemsThinking
